---
layout:     post
title:      "[N 01] Causal Inference: Basic concepts"
subtitle:   " \"Let's get started\""
date:       2022-11-02 13:52:00
author:     "Farland"
header-img: "img/post-bg/bg-causality.jpg"
catalog: true
tags:
    - Causal Inference
    - MIT
    - UCLA
    - Algorithms
    - Learning Notes
---

> 墨迹了很久，终于准备先系统地看看书 —— Farland

[Jump to contents ](#build) 

This series is the learning note of causal inference, based on the two books:

1. [Causal Inference In Statistics, A Primer. Judea Pearl et al.](http://bayes.cs.ucla.edu/PRIMER/)
2. [Elements of Causal Inference. Jonas Peters et al.](https://mitpress.mit.edu/9780262037310/elements-of-causal-inference/)

<p id = "build"></p>

## Why Causation

### Simpson's Paradox
The paradox refers to the existence of data in which a statistical association that holds for an entire population is reversed in every subpopulation.

>A group of sick patients are given the option to try a new drug. Among those who took the drug, a lower percentage recovered than among those who did not. However, when we partition by gender, we see that more men taking the drug recover than do men are not taking the drug, and more women taking the drug recover than do women are not taking the drug!

Category | Drug | No drug
-------- | ---- | -------
Men | 81/87 recovered (93%) | 234/270 revocered (87%)
Women | 192/263 recovered (73%) | 55/80 recovered (69%)
Combined Data | 273/350 recovered (78%) | 289/350 recovered (83%)

再加点例子和intro

## Causal Inference

Firstly, we should give a fine definition of causation: **A variable X is a cause of a variable Y if Y in any way relies on X for its value.**
We may also say: X is a cause of Y id Y *listens* to X and decides its value in response to what it hears.

### Structural Causal Models & Graphical Models

#### Rules

#### d-seperation

#### model testing and causality class

### Intervensions
似乎可以放下一个blog里面讲了